Topic 1: Definition of marketing, marketing management, concepts and process. 1. Introduction Exchanging goods and services is one of the earliest activities of humans relating to other humans. This activity began very simply, by exchanging food, but over time it has changed a great deal, both in how we understand it and in how it is done. Marketing is a particular way to conceive and perform the exchange of goods and services, or in other words, trade. Marketing is a specific way to carry out a commercial relationship, and consists of identifying, creating, developing and meeting demand; it is an organised process intended to create and retain customers. Marketing was first used in the United States in the early 20th century by companies producing mass market products; it gradually spread, and today can be found in many different spheres (services, non-profits, political, social and public institutions, etc.). Marketing has been revolutionised in recent years with the arrival of new technologies: digital marketing. Technology paved the way for a more innovative, participatory and connected kind of marketing, with the traditional tools now supplemented by new ones (the internet, social networks, mobile apps, data analysis, etc.). 2. Marketing management Managing the commercial activity of a company or institution, if marketing principles are applied, is called marketing management. The goal of marketing management is to identify and satisfy customers’ needs through managing stable relationships with them, and its basic task is to meet this goal as effectively as possible. We define marketing management as the science of choosing target markets and creating profitable relationships. To do this, marketing management involves: • Analysing the situation (the market, the competition, the environment, etc.). • Planning the goals that you hope to reach. • Designing strategies to reach the company’s goals. • Putting these strategies into practice through planned actions. Topic 1 Definition of marketing, marketing management, concepts and process 1 • Organising the human and material resources available to perform the actions. • Monitoring the results and making course corrections if necessary. The planning and execution of any marketing activity is based on four basic elements: the famous 4 Ps of marketing. 3. The marketing process There are five stages in the marketing process: 1. Understanding the market and customers’ needs/wants 2. Designing a marketing strategy aimed at creating customer value 3. Creating a marketing programme/plan which provides better value 4. Retaining customers, building stable, profitable relationships which keep the customer happy 5. Capturing customer value to earn profits We analyse each of them in more detail below. 3.1. Understanding the market and customers’ needs The marketer’s first step is to understand customers’ wants and needs in the market. Let’s look at some basic concepts of customers and the market. 3.1.1. Customers’ needs, wants and demands Topic 1 Definition of marketing, marketing management, concepts and process 2 A need is the feeling of lacking something, a physiological or psychological state common to all human beings, regardless of ethnicity or culture. A want is how the desire to meet a demand is expressed, according to the personal characteristics of the individual, cultural, social and environmental factors, and marketing stimuli. A demand is when a want becomes reality thanks to the resources available to the individual. Need is unlimited, while resources are limited; for this reason, the purchaser will allocate them as they deem most appropriate. This is where marketing comes in, because it affects demand: it identifies, creates and develops demand, making it possible for wants to become a reality. Companies and marketing professionals engage in a lengthy process to learn about and understand customers’ needs, wants and demands: • They study the market • They analyse customer data • They observe how customers buy and interact, both physically and online. 3.1.2. Offerings: products, services and experiences Needs and wants are satisfied by an offering: a given combination of products, services and/or experiences which the company offers on the market to satisfy a need or want. A company’s offerings consist of products: any material good, service or idea that has value for the customer and can satisfy a need. Topic 1 Definition of marketing, marketing management, concepts and process 3 • Good: a physical object. It can be consumable (e.g., a drink) or durable (e.g., an appliance). • Service: application of human or mechanical force to people, animals or objects. Services are intangible, ephemeral, and cannot be stored (e.g., bank services, legal representation, repairs, etc.). • Idea: a concept, philosophy, opinion or image. Ideas are intangible (e.g., giving blood, or a political party’s manifesto). Marketing-oriented companies focus on the advantages and experiences offered by their products or services. 3.1.3. Customer value and satisfaction In any type of product or service, customers have a very wide range of offerings on the market: a plethora of products and services which satisfy a given need. How can they choose from so many offerings? Customers create expectations about the value and satisfaction of the various offerings on the market and buy according to them. • A satisfied customer: will buy again • An unsatisfied customer: will buy from a competitor and criticise the product to others Therefore, marketing professionals must be very careful when establishing the level of expectation for their product: • If they define very low expectations, they may satisfy those who are already buying, but will not attract new customers. • If they raise expectations too high, buyers may be disappointed. The value of a product or service for the customer, and the satisfaction they get from it, are key components in developing and managing the customer relationship. 3.1.4. Exchanges and relationships Marketing professionals are trying to elicit a reaction to a given offering on the market. Marketing happens when people decide to satisfy their needs and wants through an exchange relationship – in other words, through the act of obtaining a desired object and/or service by offering something in return. Marketing consists of performing actions to create and maintain exchange relationships with target audiences in relation to products, services or ideas. Going further than attracting new customers, the goal is to keep them and have them increase their exchanges with the company. 3.1.5. Markets Topic 1 Definition of marketing, marketing management, concepts and process 4 The exchange concept brings us to another new concept, the market: the set of current and potential buyers of a product or service. Marketing manages these markets to create stable relationships with these customers. 3.2. Designing a customer-oriented marketing strategy and plan When marketers know and understand the customers in a market, they can design a customer-oriented strategy. To do this they must answer two fundamental questions: • What customers are we going to cater to? = What is our target market? • What is the best way to serve those customers? = What is our value proposition? First, the company must decide which customers it will focus on; it is not possible to serve all its potential customers well and, therefore, it must select the customers it can attend to well while also making a profit. To make this selection the market must be divided into groups/types of customer, known as market segmentation. Meanwhile, the company must decide how it will serve its target customers - in other words, how it will differentiate itself and position itself in the market. To establish its market position, a company must define its value proposition: the set of benefits or values it promises to provide for its customers to meet their needs. The value proposition is what differentiates one brand from another. A clear, strong value proposition enables a company to gain a competitive advantage in its market, because it offers something that others do not, or offers the same product or service in a different way. To sum up, a company’s marketing strategy consists of defining which customers it will focus on and how it will create value for them. 3.3. Creating a marketing plan After deciding on their strategy, marketing professionals will develop their marketing programme or plan – in other words, turning their strategy into action. To carry out this plan, they use the tools which make up the marketing mix. These tools are the famous 4 Ps of marketing: • Product: the good or service being offered. • Price: the value the company sets for the product. • Placement: the system used to bring the product to the market. • Promotion: communicating the benefits of the product (advertising, personal selling, point of sale promotion, etc.). Topic 1 Definition of marketing, marketing management, concepts and process 5 To concretise its value proposition, a company will create an offering (product) which meets a need; it will decide how much to charge for that offering (price), how to make the offering available to its target consumers (placement) and how to communicate the offering to its target customers and convince them of its benefits (promotion). 3.4. Retaining customers, building stable, profitable relationships which keep the customer happy All the steps in the marketing process lead to the most important element: building profitable relationships with the customers. For this purpose, it is essential to manage customer relations: customer capture, retention and development. The key to creating long-term relationships with customers is to create more value and satisfaction for the customer, because a satisfied customer is a loyal one. Attracting and retaining customers is a hard task, because they usually have a large variety to choose from. Normally, they will choose the offering with the greatest perceived value: customers assess the difference between the cost and benefit obtained, comparing it with competitors’ offerings. Consumer satisfaction depends on the perceived performance of the product in relation to the buyer’s expectations. Topic 1 Definition of marketing, marketing management, concepts and process 6 • If the product performs worse than expected, the consumer will be dissatisfied. • If the product performs according to expectations, the consumer will be satisfied. • If the product exceeds expectations, the consumer will be very satisfied. Marketing-oriented companies work to keep their customers satisfied, because a high satisfaction level can lead to greater loyalty and thus better returns for the company. 3.5. Capturing customer value to earn profits The final stage of the marketing process consists of receiving value in exchange for the product supplied or service provided to the customer. This value may be in the form of sales, market share or current and future profits. Creating value enables companies to retain customers, increasing: • Customer lifetime value: the customer’s future purchases of a product or service throughout their life. Good customer relationship management means ensuring the customer is delighted with our products or services, because happy customers are loyal, and speak well of the company and its products to the people around them. Loyal customers spend more, while losing a customer means losing money. • Customer share: a company’s share of all the purchases made by a consumer in its product category. Companies can improve this share with various marketing techniques: cross-selling, a wider range of products, or improving sales so customers buy more products and services. • Customer capital: the total discounted values throughout the life of all the company’s current and potential customers. Therefore, this is a measurement of the future value of the company’s customer base. The more loyal the profitable customers of a company, the greater its customer capital. The figure below illustrates the marketing process. Topic 1 Definition of marketing, marketing management, concepts and process 7 Topic 1 Definition of marketing, marketing management, concepts and process 8 Topic 2: Analysing the marketing environment 1. Presentation This chapter explains the first of the five stages of the marketing process: analysing and understanding the market and customers’ needs in an environment which is often complex and changeable. Apart from the customer, there are many players who may work for or against the company’s interests (suppliers, competitors, intermediaries, etc.), as well as elements in the environment which may present opportunities or threats (these elements may be economic, cultural, technological, demographic, etc.). All these aspects can affect the company’s ability to attract customers and build a stable relationship with them. Therefore, in order to develop an effective marketing strategy, the company first needs to understand the environment in which it operates. 2. The marketing environment The environment in which a company finds itself comprises non-marketing agents and forces which influence the ability of marketing management to build and maintain stable relationships with their target customers. For this reason, the company must be alert to new developments and changes in its environment, take them into account, adapt to them, and even lead such changes. Within the company, the marketer must monitor trends and changes for threats and opportunities, with the help of the appropriate tools (market research and marketing intelligence), and should also spend much of their time studying the environment of their company and their competitors. Both factors will enable them to anticipate new challenges and opportunities in the market and be prepared to adapt their company’s marketing strategy. The marketing environment comprises the micro-environment and the macroenvironment. 2.1. The micro-environment Agents close to the company which influence its ability to serve its customers: the company itself, suppliers, marketing intermediaries, consumer markets, competitors and stakeholders. Topic 2 Analysing the marketing environment 9 Marketing will be successful if it builds effective relationships with the other departments in the company, suppliers, and the other agents in the microenvironment, because all of them make up the company’s value-creating network. When designing the company’s marketing plan, the marketer must take into account the rest of the departments, which make up the internal environment and influence their decisions. Suppliers are important agents because they provide the company with the resources it needs to produce its goods and services. Hence, any problems with the suppliers can affect the company, especially its marketing department. Marketing intermediaries help the company promote, sell and distribute its products to customers; they include storage and physical distribution companies, as well as marketing services (market research, advertising agencies, graphic design studios, etc.). To be successful, a company must offer its customers greater value and satisfaction than its competitors. Therefore, as well as taking into account the customers’ needs, the marketing professional must achieve a strategic advantage over its peers. The marketing micro-environment is also influenced by stakeholders; by this we mean any group which impacts the company’s ability to reach its financial, media, governmental, civil, internal, general or local goals. Customers are the most important group of agents in the company microenvironment, as the entire organisation revolves around them and the goal of establishing successful relationships with them. While on the subject of customers, we must also refer to a broader concept, which will be the context within which the marketing department operates: the market. We understand “the market” to be the set of people, individuals or in organisations, who Topic 2 Analysing the marketing environment 10 need a given product or service, who want to buy it or may want to in the future, and who have the financial and legal capacity to do so. From the marketing perspective, we refer to five types of customer markets: • Consumer markets: individuals and households who acquire products or services for personal consumption. • Industrial markets: buying goods and services for use in their production process. • Reseller markets: buying goods and services to resell for profit. • Government markets: public bodies which buy goods and services to produce public services. • International markets: buyers in other countries. 2.1. The macro-environment The broader social forces which affect the micro-environment: demographic, economic, natural, technological, political and cultural factors. These factors make up the opportunities and threats which a company may face. Some of them are unpredictable and uncontrollable, but others can be predicted and handled by skilled management. Companies which can predict, understand and adapt to their environment can remain successful, but those which cannot may find themselves in difficulties, even in the case of major corporations. Demographic factors are relevant for marketing professionals because they refer to individuals who make up the markets. Therefore, they must pay attention to trends, Topic 2 Analysing the marketing environment 11 changes and developments which could affect their business: family structure, migrations, ageing population, etc. A functioning market requires individuals with purchasing power; the factors affecting consumers’ purchasing power and spending patterns make up the economic environment. These factors have a major impact on buying habits and consumer spending. Natural factors refer both to the natural resources which companies need (for example, their operation could be affected by a shortage of raw materials) and to unexpected natural phenomena which can affect them, such as natural or climate disasters. The latter are unpredictable, but companies must be ready to deal with them if they happen, both to avoid problems and to respond to any which might represent an opportunity. Technology might be the force which has had the most impact on companies and marketing in recent years. Technological factors are bringing major changes in the markets, enabling the development of new products and creating new opportunities (credit cards, internet, mobile phones, telemedicine, online sales, smartphones, etc.) Meanwhile, the impact of new technologies has led to a new way of understanding marketing: digital marketing involves the use of digital tools and resources to reach customers more directly and in a more personalised way. In many companies, marketing decisions are very much affected by changes in sociopolitical factors. These factors include legislation, government organisations and pressure groups. They are particularly relevant for companies operating in regulated markets (e.g., pharmaceutical products, telecommunications, etc.), and to a lesser extent to all other companies, as they are all subject to some degree to legislation, new regulations due to changes of government, changes due to unstable political situations, etc. Finally, companies may be affected by cultural factors, meaning the basic values, perceptions, preferences and behaviour of a society. Everyone grows up in a given society which shapes their belief system, basic values, needs and tastes, all characteristics which affect decision-making in marketing (for example, different family models, leisure activities or food in different countries). 3. Managing the marketing environment There is a significant saying in marketing about companies and how they manage their environment: “There are three types of company: those that make things happen, those that watch them happen, and those that wonder what happened.” Topic 2 Analysing the marketing environment 12 The first type is proactive: they develop strategies and take action to change their environment, organise media events to get their message to the public, work to encourage legislation which lets them operate, etc., in other words, these companies manage the information they have about their environment, which enables them to anticipate events and adapt the environment to suit their interests. These companies and their products are the ones that usually create new industries and markets (Amazon, Google, Facebook, Cabify, etc.). Meanwhile, the other two are reactive, merely watching and reacting when things have already happened, and in the worst-case scenario by the time they realise what has happened they have no valid solutions.
